Neural networks or connectionist systems are a computational approach used in computer science other research disciplines, which is based on a large collection of neural units (artificial neurons), loosely mimicking the way a biological brain solves problems with large clusters of biological neurons connected by axons. 
Each neural unit is connected with many others, and links can be enforcing or inhibitory in their effect on the activation state of connected neural units. 
Each individual neural unit may have a summation function which combines the values of all its inputs together. 
There may be a threshold function or limiting function on each connection and on the unit itself, such that the signal must surpass the limit before propagating to other neurons. 
These systems are self-learning and trained, rather than explicitly programmed, and excel in areas where the solution or feature detection is difficult to express in a traditional computer program.
Neural networks typically consist of multiple layers or a cube design, and the signal path traverses from front to back. 
Back propagation is the use of forward stimulation to reset weights on the "front" neural units and this is sometimes done in combination with training where the correct result is known. 
More modern networks are a bit more free flowing in terms of stimulation and inhibition with connections interacting in a much more chaotic and complex fashion. 
Dynamic neural networks are the most advanced, in that they dynamically can, based on rules, form new connections and even new neural units while disabling others.
The goal of the neural network is to solve problems in the same way that the human brain would, although several neural networks are more abstract. 
Modern neural network projects typically work with a few thousand to a few million neural units and millions of connections, which is still several orders of magnitude less complex than the human brain and closer to the computing power of a worm.
New brain research often stimulates new patterns in neural networks. 
One new approach is using connections which span much further and link processing layers rather than always being localized to adjacent neurons. 
Other research being explored with the different types of signal over time that axons propagate, such as Deep Learning, interpolates greater complexity than a set of boolean variables being simply on or off.
Neural networks are based on real numbers, with the value of the core and of the axon typically being a representation between 0 and 1.
An interesting facet of these systems is that they are unpredictable in their success with self-learning. 
After training, some become great problem solvers and others don't perform as well. 
In order to train them, several thousand cycles of interaction typically occur.
Like other machine learning methods – systems that learn from data – neural networks have been used to solve a wide variety of tasks, like computer vision and speech recognition, that are hard to solve using ordinary rule-based programming.
Historically, the use of neural network models marked a directional shift in the late eighties from high-level (symbolic) artificial intelligence, characterized by expert systems with knowledge embodied in if-then rules, to low-level (sub-symbolic) machine learning, characterized by knowledge embodied in the parameters of a cognitive model with some dynamical system.